Instrumentation: Guidance/conventions for logs, metrics and traces (#55562)
grafana/grafana: contribute/engineering/backend/instrumentation.md

# Instrumenting Grafana

Guidance, conventions and best practices for instrumenting Grafana using logs, metrics and traces.

## Logs

Logs are files that record events, warnings and errors as they occur within a software environment. Most logs include contextual information, such as the time an event occurred and which user or endpoint was associated with it.

Use the _pkg/infra/log_ package to create a named structured logger. Example:

```go
import (
  "fmt"

  "github.com/grafana/grafana/pkg/infra/log"
)

logger := log.New("my-logger")
logger.Debug("Debug msg")

> logger.Warning("Warning msg")
> logger.Info("Info msg")
> logger.Error("Error msg", "error", fmt.Errorf("BOOM))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
logger.Info("Info msg")
logger.Warning("Warning msg")
logger.Error("Error msg", "error", fmt.Errorf("BOOM"))
```

```

### Naming conventions

> Consider naming the logger using lowercase characters, e.g. `log.New("my-logger")` using snake_case or kebab-case styling.

Author: Good point :+1: I'll change it.

```suggestion
Name the logger using lowercase characters, e.g. `log.New("my-logger")` using snake_case or kebab-case styling.
```

> Consider to prefix the logger name with an area name if using different loggers across a feature/common packages, e.g. `log.New("plugin.loader")` and `log.New("plugin.client")`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider prefixing the logger name with an area name when using different loggers across a feature or common package, e.g. `log.New("plugin.loader")` and `log.New("plugin.client")`.
```

> Consider prefixing the logger name with an area name when using different loggers across a feature or related packages, e.g. `log.New("plugin.loader")` and `log.New("plugin.client")`.

Author: ```suggestion
Prefix the logger name with an area name when using different loggers across a feature or related packages, e.g. `log.New("plugin.loader")` and `log.New("plugin.client")`.
```

> Start the log message with a capital letter, e.g. `logger.Info("Hello world")` instead of `logger.Info("hello world")`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start the log message with a capital letter, e.g. `logger.Info("Hello world")` instead of `logger.Info("hello world")`. The log message should be an identifier for the log entry, avoid parameterization in favor of key-value pairs for additional data.
```

> Use snake_case style when naming log keys, e.g. _remote_addr_ instead of _remoteAddr_.

Reviewer: I disagree with this, and the codebase isn't consistent on this. We've for example consistently used `traceID`, including in the recent contextual logger refactoring.

https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/d9161c1a1bf9f1b19d9a1921f05982d175284f76/pkg/infra/tracing/tracing.go#L38

I think it makes sense to try to remain true to the Go identifier, which more likely will be camelCase than snake case, if anything, but I also think that being tolerant of _both_ isn't necessarily something that should be frowned upon here. It seems unnecessary to me to open up to nitpicking here.

Reviewer 3: kind of agree - IMO we either use a linter for things like this or just write up a nice-to-have recommendation

Author: I thought people would have input on this :) Was looking at the HTTP logger middleware and it uses snake_case styling :) 
https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/48a8b35ece22fad106c94cbd03bc4de63c2ac886/pkg/middleware/logger.go#L57-L70

> I think it makes sense to try to remain true to the Go identifier, which more likely will be camelCase than snake case, if anything, but I also think that being tolerant of both isn't necessarily something that should be frowned upon here. It seems unnecessary to me to open up to nitpicking here.

Definitely sounds reasonable to me :+1: 

> just write up a nice-to-have recommendation

Yeah, I think I always considered camelCase for log keys, but after writing the conventions for metrics and traces I got the idea that using same style for everything would be consistent and allow switching from metrics (Prometheus) to logs (Loki) and possibly re-using the labels. But now I see that metric labels and log labels are not the same as log keys in general so I agree on camelCase.

```suggestion
Prefer using camelCase style when naming log keys, e.g. _remoteAddr_, to be consistent with Go identifiers. 
```

Use the key _error_ when logging Go errors, e.g. `logger.Error("Something failed", "error", fmt.Errorf("BOOM"))`.

> ### Log levels

Author: ```suggestion
### Validate and sanitize input coming from user input

If log messages or key/value pairs originates from user input they **should** be validated and sanitized. 

Be **careful** to not expose any sensitive information in log messages e.g. secrets, credentials etc. It's especially easy to do by mistake when including a struct as value. 

### Log levels
```

When to use which log level?

- **Debug:** Informational messages of high frequency and/or less-important messages during normal operations.
- **Info:** Informational messages of low frequency and/or important messages.

> - **Error:** Error messages indicating some operation failed (with an error).
> - **Warning:** Should in normal cases not be used/needed. If used should be actionable.

Reviewer: I'd suggest consistently placing them in rising order of severity to make the hierarchy clear to someone who isn't yet familiar with leveled logging 🙂

```suggestion
- **Warning:** Should in normal cases not be used/needed. If used should be actionable.
- **Error:** Error messages indicating some operation failed (with an error).
```

### Contextual logging

Use a contextual logger to include additional key/value pairs attached to `context.Context`, e.g. `traceID`, to allow correlating logs with traces and/or correlate logs with a common identifier.

Example:

```go
import (
  "context"
  "fmt"

  "github.com/grafana/grafana/pkg/infra/log"
)

var logger = log.New("my-logger")

func doSomething(ctx context.Context) {
  ctxLogger := logger.FromContext(ctx)
  ctxLogger.Debug("Debug msg")

>   ctxLogger.Warning("Warning msg")
>   ctxLogger.Info("Info msg")
>   ctxLogger.Error("Error msg", "error", fmt.Errorf("BOOM))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ctxLogger.Info("Info msg")
  ctxLogger.Warning("Warning msg")
  ctxLogger.Error("Error msg", "error", fmt.Errorf("BOOM"))
```

}
```

### Enable certain log levels for certain loggers

During development it's convenient to enable certain log level, e.g. debug, for certain loggers to minimize the generated log output and make it easier to find things. See [[log.filters]](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#filters) for information how to configure this.

It's also possible to configure multiple loggers:

```ini
[log]
filters = rendering:debug \
          ; alerting.notifier:debug \
          oauth.generic_oauth:debug \
          ; oauth.okta:debug \
          ; tsdb.postgres:debug \
          ; tsdb.mssql:debug \
          ; provisioning.plugins:debug \
          ; provisioning:debug \
          ; provisioning.dashboard:debug \
          ; provisioning.datasources:debug \
          datasources:debug \
          data-proxy-log:debug
```

> ## Metrics

Reviewer 3: Given the existence of https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/logql/metric_queries/ and https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/enterprise/recorded-queries/, I don't have a clear picture on why would I ever publish metrics, as I can just log everything and then create metrics from the logs as needed. Could we maybe add a section explaining when to use one over the other?

Reviewer 4: Creating metrics from logs can be great but in some cases metrics are just better. Ex
* When instrumenting something very high frequent as it would spam the logs. 
* Gauges. Ex how many requests there are in flight or how many connections are currently waiting for the database connection pool. Doing this with logs would require pre and post logs and calculating the diff. 

Another thing to consider are none grafana cloud users of Grafana (I know!!) who might not have loki with recording rules.

Metrics are quantifiable measurements that reflect the health and performance of applications or infrastructure.

Consider using metrics to provide real-time insight into the state of resources. If you want to know how responsive your application is or identify anomalies that could be early signs of a performance issue, metrics are a key source of visibility.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> There are many possible types of metrics that can be tracked. One popular method for defining metrics is the [RED method](https://grafana.com/blog/2018/08/02/the-red-method-how-to-instrument-your-services/).

Reviewer 2: Should this paragraph be under "Metric types" below?

### Metric types

See [Prometheus metric types](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/) for a list and description of the different metric types you can use and when to use them.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

There are many possible types of metrics that can be tracked. One popular method for defining metrics is the [RED method](https://grafana.com/blog/2018/08/02/the-red-method-how-to-instrument-your-services/).

```

Use snake_case style when naming metrics, e.g. _http_request_duration_seconds_ instead of _httpRequestDurationSeconds_.

Use snake_case style when naming labels, e.g. _status_code_ instead of _statusCode_.

If metric type is a _counter_, name it with a `_total` suffix, e.g. _http_requests_total_.

If metric type is a _histogram_ and you're measuring duration, name it with a `_<unit>` suffix, e.g. _http_request_duration_seconds_.

If metric type is a _gauge_, name it to denote it's a value that can increase and decrease , e.g. _http_request_in_flight_.

### Label values and high cardinality

Be careful with what label values you add/accept. Using/allowing too many label values could result in [high cardinality problems](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/02/15/what-are-cardinality-spikes-and-why-do-they-matter/).

If label values originates from user input they **should** be validated. Use `metricutil.SanitizeLabelName(<label value>`) from _pkg/infra/metrics/metricutil_ package to sanitize label names. Very **important** to only allow a pre-defined set of labels to minimize the risk of high cardinality problems.

> Be **careful** to not expose any sensitive information in label values, e.g. secrets, credentials etc.

Reviewer 3: I guess the same applies to logs, where its super easy to accidentally put a whole object worth of info

Author: Yes, very good point :+1:

Author: Fixed

| ----------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| get                     | Too general                                              |
| get_account/42          | Too specific                                             |
| get_account             | Good, and account_id=42 would make a nice Span attribute |
| get_account/{accountId} | Also good (using the “HTTP route”)                       |

Span attribute and span event attributes should follow the [Attribute naming specification from OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/common/attribute-naming/). Good attribute key examples:

- service.version
- http.status_code

See [Trace semantic conventions from OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/) for additional conventions regarding well-known protocols and operations.

### Span names and high cardinality

Be careful with what span names you add/accept. Using/allowing too many span names could result in high cardinality problems.

### Validate and sanitize input coming from user input

> If span names, attribute or event values originates from user input they **should** be validated and sanitized. It's very **important** to only allow a pre-defined set of span names to minimize the risk of high cardinality problems.

Reviewer 3: I am curious about attribute value sanitization - do we have any util or that? I see you have mention one for label names in a section above

Author: I don't think we have one for this purpose and not sure the one for labels work as expected. Could also be that opentelemetry validates this internally :shrug:

Be **careful** to not expose any sensitive information in span names, attribute or event values, e.g. secrets, credentials etc.

### How to collect, visualize and query traces (and correlate logs with traces) locally

1. Start Jaeger

   ```bash
   make devenv sources=jaeger
   ```

2. Enable tracing in Grafana

   opentelemetry tracing (recommended):

   ```ini
   [tracing.opentelemetry.jaeger]
   address = http://localhost:14268/api/traces
   ```

>    opentracing tracing (deprecated/not recommended):

Reviewer 2: Question: why is `opentracing` included, if it's deprecated? Does it make sense to leave it out entirely? (I genuinely don't know the answer)

Author: We still officially support it and we have users out there using it. In case we need to investigate/test it and until we remove support for it think it's good to keep here. WDYT?

Reviewer: NB: OpenTracing and OpenCensus merged into OpenTelemetry, which is why we (and others) are moving from the former to the latter.

Reviewer 2: 👍 thanks for the explanations!

Start the log message with a capital letter, e.g. `logger.Info("Hello world")` instead of `logger.Info("hello world")`. The log message should be an identifier for the log entry, avoid parameterization in favor of key-value pairs for additional data.

Prefer using camelCase style when naming log keys, e.g. _remoteAddr_, to be consistent with Go identifiers.

Use the key _error_ when logging Go errors, e.g. `logger.Error("Something failed", "error", fmt.Errorf("BOOM"))`.

### Validate and sanitize input coming from user input

If log messages or key/value pairs originates from user input they **should** be validated and sanitized.

Be **careful** to not expose any sensitive information in log messages e.g. secrets, credentials etc. It's especially easy to do by mistake when including a struct as value.

### Log levels

When to use which log level?

- **Debug:** Informational messages of high frequency and/or less-important messages during normal operations.
- **Info:** Informational messages of low frequency and/or important messages.
- **Warning:** Should in normal cases not be used/needed. If used should be actionable.

> - **Error:** Error messages indicating some operation failed (with an error).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Error:** Error messages indicating some operation failed (with an error) and the program didn't have a way of handle the error.
```
